# Project Background 

---

The discourse on the AIDS crisis, and the origins of AIDS/HIV activism began in the early 80s, well before there was a title for the virus and disease. The earliest publications discussing the disease referred to it using homophobic rhetoric calling it a “gay plague” and “gay cancer.” The reasoning for the term “gay cancer,” correlates to Kaposi Sarcoma, which causes cancerous lesions in the soft tissue of people with AIDS (PWA); the term “gay plague,” was associated with Pneumocytis carinii pneumonia that often burdened PWA. Due to homophobic attitudes around the disease, the response from the government and medical community was slow to offer meaningful assistance to infected individuals and their partners. The marginalization and endangerment of PWA lead to many advocacy groups forming in the 80s. One group in particular, ACT UP, was formed in 1987 in response to the government and medical community’s neglect of PWA.

## Useful Research Links

http://www.actupny.org/

http://www.actuporalhistory.org/index1.html

https://www.hiv.gov/blog/new-hiv-infections-drop-18-percent-in-six-years

https://www.advocate.com/commentary/2016/4/08/treasure-trove-queer-history-now-online

https://timeline.avert.org/

http://digitallibrary.usc.edu/cdm/landingpage/collection/p15799coll4

https://www.nytimes.com/1981/07/03/us/rare-cancer-seen-in-41-homosexuals.html

http://www.amfar.org/thirty-years-of-hiv/aids-snapshots-of-an-epidemic/

https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/su6004a11.htm 

---

## Historical Background

The historiography of ACT UP began in 1989 with ACT UP activist Larry Kramer's work "Reports from the Holocaust." Kramer is the man traditionally credited with founding ACT UP, however he only assumes partial credit for this in his book. His work was published just two years after the founding of ACT UP and displays an organization and a movement in evolution. This work serves as a primary and secondary source, the original intention of the source was to provide a memoir of activism as well as a history of the AIDS crisis from the first onset of the illness. In Kramer's first person narrative, he describes the organization as, "A small bunch of two few very courageous people willing to make rude noises." (Kramer, 171) 

Throughout the work, Kramer blames Ronald Reagan, the American government at all levels, the right wing agenda, and homophobia for AIDS patient's inadequate access to AIDS medication and a lack of funding for AIDS research. Kramer's title refers to the AIDS crisis as the Holocaust, in regards to this he argues, "AIDS is our Holocaust. Tens of thousands of our precious men are dying. Soon it will be hundreds of thousands. AIDS is our Holocaust and Reagan is our Hitler. New York City is our Auschwitz." (Kramer, 173) His testimony is horrifying, it provides insight into the rhetoric of one of the founders of ACT UP as well as the helplessness that was felt in New York City, in the 1980s. Kramer emphasizes throughout the work, that the main goal of his activism was drugs and government funding for AIDS research.    

John-Manuel Andriote, is a journalist that examines public health, politics, culture, and the AIDS crisis. He began covering the epidemic in the 1980s. In 1999, Andriote published "Victory Deferred" which engages with PWAs inadequate access to pharmecutical drugs. Like Kramer, Andriote argues that the lack of medicine was due to a delayed response from the American government, particularly the FDA, and the public health community in general.(Andriote, 179) Peter Cohen, a scholar of Gay and Lesbian Studies and language, and a member of ACT UP Rhode Island, offered the historiography "Love and Anger: Essays on AIDS, Activism, and Politics" in 1998. Cohen, like Kramer and Andriote, argues that the main goal of ACT UP at its genesis, was pharmecutical drugs. (Cohen, 16) All of these scholars, regardless of their lenses of analysis can see that the inherent purpose of ACT UP was to save lives. And, they are also all in agreeance that their activism was a response.

A response to the inadequate government response to the AIDS crisis. The government’s neglect lead to community building. This is not the first occurrence of American citizens forming a community in response to systematic inequity. As David Johnson’s "The Lavender Scare:The Cold War Persecution of Gays and Lesbians in the Federal Government" demonstrates, during the Cold War, oppression of homosexuals was common practice and government oppression lead to resistance and activism. Johnson argues, “ Through publicity, lobbying, demonstrations, and litigation, gay men and lesbians succeeded in dismantling the policies designed to exclude them from governmental service. Thus the policies meant to counter the power and influence of gay civil servants actually fostered the creation of an effective and influential political gay pressure group.” (Johnson, Epilogue) Johnson's history demonstrates, the LGBT community was familiar with political activism by the time of the AIDS crisis. This provides insight into why and how the organization was able to establish such an enormous mobilized community in New York City, that would lead to eighty ACT UP chapters by 1993.(Cohen, 15)

Andriote's chapter titled "Advance and Retreat" discusses the complexities of ACT UP's activism and argues that once the government responded and started to make progress for PWAs, the organization as well as their tactics became obsolete.  Cohen's "Love and Anger" primarily examines the social and literary response to the AIDS crisis, because of this, Cohen made very similiar observations to those of Andriote. Cohen argues that the organization has been in a steady decline since 1991. (Cohen, 6) Thomas Long, a scholar of Lesbian and Gay Studies, studied "The Cultural Semiotics of an Epidemic" in his 2005 publication, "AIDS and American Apocalypticism." (Long) Discussing ACT UP and Larry Kramer, Long engages with the decline of the organization. Long argues, "One of the difficulties of the AIDS epidemic has been that it is virtually impossible for individuals or collectives to maintain for very long a crisis ethos." (Long, 67) Taking Andriote, Cohen, and Long's analyses together, we can see that the decline in ACT UP's membership had multiple causations. Two particular reasons were the  decline of the "crisis ethos" as well as a confusion about their purpose after the government began making strides in AIDS research and public health.       

Although the membership of ACT UP declined in the early 90s, many members stayed involved. The mission of the organization evolved at this time they began to team up with women's organizations that were fighting government oppression. Tamar Carroll, a U.S. historian focusing on gender and sexuality as well as public and digital history, offers an analysis of AIDS related activism in the United States. Carroll’s "Mobilizing New York: AIDS, Antipoverty, and Feminist Activism" provides insight into ACT UP and Women’s Health Action and Mobilization (WHAM) coming together in 1991 to protest inadequate access to women’s healthcare and abortion services in New York. Carrol argues that the two organizations coming together provided the two communities with an “immediate sense of connection.” (Carroll, 133-134) Including this information, offers consideration of ACT UP’s activism for purposes that were not inherently AIDS related. A lack of access to equitable healthcare was a uniting topic for LGBTQ activists and women’s rights activists. Carroll argues that prior feminist activism provided ACT UP with inspiration and methods for resistance. (Carroll, 137) As did LGBT activism from the 50s and 60s, specifically Stonewall. 

The actions and successes of ACT UP stood partially upon the shoulders of previous organizations and their members. As Cohen explains in "Love and Anger," Larry Kramer, was a member of the Gay Men's Health Crisis (GMHC) before forming ACT UP, he had previous experience in LGBT activism. Kramer was displeased with the organizations brand of AIDS activism, so he disbanded and formed ACT UP in March of 1987. (Cohen, 15) Cohen describes Kramer as a leader that had a habit of promoting violence and castigating politicians that didn't act in fashions that he approved. (Cohen 33, 61) Cohen continues that Kramer's suggested use of violence made numerous ACT UP members uncomfortable. (Cohen, 61) Andriote's "Victory Deferred" also emphasizes that Kramer had tendencies to insight violence, and faced resistance from within his organization and from the LGBT community. (Andriote, 247-250) Engaging with Kramer's "crisis discourse," Long argues that Kramer's rhetoric was "situated in the context of his struggle with and for authority both within the gay male community and within the professional medical bureaucracy." (Long, 67) Importantly, Long is approaching Kramer's discourse through an intersectional analysis, he considers Kramer's specific locus in American society and how he navigates the world both physically and ideologically. Kramer's activism and rhetoric were very much so performative, he was performing his struggle.  

Throughout the historical works we engaged with, ACT UP is commonly referred to as "radical." However the group has also been referred to as "militant." Feminist Studies professor, Leila J. Rupp's 1999 work, "A Desired Pat: A Short History of Same-Sex Love in America" argues that the AIDS crisis fueled mobilization and "gave rise to militant groups such as ACT-UP." (Rupp,179) Kramer considers how the public receives his activism in "Reports from the Holocaust" asserting, "I've been criticized so often and attacked so continuously for so much of my rhetoric that I've tried to find support for my feelings in the philosophies of others whose lives have given them little choice but to think about tragedy and attempt to find, if not definitive explaination, rhyme, or reason, at least a few ground rules on how to get to tomorrow." (Kramer, 275) 

His community was dying around him. His rhetoric was fueled by outrage and despair. From analyzing Kramer's personal narrative and the additional sources we have engaged with, it appears that Kramer's motives and rhetoric were supposed to be provocative. He and members of ACT UP, wanted attention, they wanted a public reaction. They were called "ACT UP" after all. Although Kramer's brand of activism was considered "radical," it was evidently effective. To be sure of this, consider the fact that Larry Kramer's brand of activism is still being discussed 31 years after ACT UP's founding. The reason we have chosen to emphasize Larry Kramer and his rhetoric is because Larry Kramer is the human embodiment of what ACT UP represented or existed as, in the 1980s and 90s. His objectives and activism show the hopes, fears, and dreams of an organization. An organization that had 1000s of members and numerous branches. Members may not have always agreed with Kramer, but they shared the common goal of protesting inaduequate health care and governmental neglect. The root of all of their activism was to find an end to a tragic death sentence for members of their community. 

We are nearly four decades out from the first diagnoses of AIDS. We still have not found a cure. But, today PWAs (residing in the United States) are living longer than ever due to research, increased access to healthcare and major advancements in  pharmecutical drugs. Public health has also become increasingly informative, educating the public has led to lower rates of transmission within the Unitied States. According to HIV.gov, HIV transmission dropped 18% in the United States between 2008 and 2014. Progress is happening every day due to activist organizations, government efforts, scientific research and evolutions in technology. Like all historiographies, this one is in evolution. But, this historiography in particular needs an evolution, people's lives hang in the balance. How exciting would it be, for these sources to be printed again, with a new epilogue, one that reads, "We ACTed UP, and now we have a cure!" That would be such a beautiful conclusion.   

 
---

## Digital Background

After attending LA’s Queer Studies conference in 2011, Alexis Lothian an assistant professor of Women’s Studies and LGBT Studies at the University of Maryland College Park, composed a blog post explaining the difficulties for scholars of gender studies to engage with the digital humanities. Lothian considers the fact that even if a scholar creates a digital project, they may not consider themselves a digital humanist, or refer to their work as a digital project. Lothian explains, “My experience suggests that many, many politicized queers and people of color engaged in scholarly work in and out of the academy do use digital tools and think critically about them and even create them; they just don’t necessarily do so under the sign of the digital humanities.” Lothian also outlines the topics that are discussed at many conferences, demonstrating that important questions are being raised, such as: What are the digital humanities? What is the impact of technology in humanist and gender scholarship? And, importantly the conferences tend to consider the question of representation of LGBTQ and people of color in the digital humanities.

Lothian, Alexis. "Conference Thoughts: Queer Studies and the Digital Humanities." Queer Geek Theory. October 18, 2011. http://www.queergeektheory.org/2011/10/conference-thoughts-queer-studies-and-the-digital-humanities/.

	
In 2015, an article titled “Beyond the Margins: Intersectionality and the Digital Humanities” appeared in Digital Humanities Quarterly. Roopika Risam a scholar of digital humanities and the African diaspora, authored the article. Risam posed useful questions and expanded the dialogue on inclusivity and intersectionality in the digital humanities community. Risam’s article suggests that while there is much work to be done, in recent years people of color, women, and the LGBTQ community are increasingly joining the discourse of digital humanities; and these groups have increasingly produced or collaborated on meaningful digital humanities projects. Risam’s article is pertinent to our project due to our own considerations of an intersectional analysis, and why we found it to be a particularly useful lens to use as we explored ACT UP’s digital oral history repository. As Risam argues, “Existing digital humanities projects provide examples of how, in small and large ways, theory and method can be combined to address recurring questions of the role of race, class, gender, ability, sexuality, nationality, and other categories of difference within the field.” 

All of Risam’s topics of consideration: race, gender, class, sexuality, gender identity, ability and nationality are captured within ACT UP’s digital collection. No, ACT UP’s DH project was not created as an inherently “digital humanities” project per se, but as Lothian has pointed out, even if it was not originally intended to serve as an example of a DH project, it still exists as one. Importantly, the consideration of  various demographics of people, as well as individuals from those communities offering digital projects, reshapes the façade of the DH community. Additionally, as the DH community becomes more diverse, there is a likelihood that diversity will increase over time. Risam considers how utilizing a specific theory, such as intersectionality, doesn’t just offer race, gender, and class diversity, it also offers intellectual diversity. From engaging with Risam’s article one may discern that individuals are complex, as are DH projects, and advancements can come from making use of an intersectional lens. Advancements can come from a heterogenous group of people collaborating, posing significant questions, and answering in distinct fashions. Risam makes it unambiguously clear that the theories and methods behind a DH collabortation are just as important as the digital aspects.   

Risam, Roopika. "Beyond the Margins: Intersectionality and the Digital Humanities." Digital Humanities Quarterly. 2015. http://digitalhumanities.org:8081/dhq/vol/9/2/000208/000208.html.


Dan Royals, a professor of history at Florida International University, focuses on oral histories, the digital humanities and the recent past. In October of 2017, Royals offered up a tremendously inciteful article titled, “Directions for Digital HIV/AIDS History.”  The article was featured on Process, the Organization of American Historians’ blog. The relevance of Royals’ article to our project is profound, the title alone signaled how pertinent this writing would be for our study. Royals argues that it is necessary for the history of AIDS to be written and communicated in a digital format. Royals celebrates digital archives and asserts that the accessibility of digital archives and searchability via metadata is pertinent when building a digital archive. He also celebrates the global collaborations that are possible due to the digital humanities, this very project on ACT UP is a collaboration, as is Process, the blog this writing appears on.      

The ACT UP Oral History Project is mentioned by name in this article, Royals considers the collection’s potential in his discussion of text analysis, asserting “Historians of HIV/AIDS could similarly look for linguistic and conceptual patterns in AIDS reportage, academic journals, or the oral histories produced by the AIDS Oral History Project and the ACT UP Oral History Project.” Regarding network analysis, Royals suggests that one could trace activists’ connections based on events that they attended and organizations they were involved with. The capabilities appear endless after reading Royals’ article. And, that is the purpose of the article, to show that digital humanities offer a medium with truly inventive potential for dispersing knowledge and deriving meaning.  

Royals, Dan. "Directions for Digital HIV/AIDS History." Process: A Blog for American History. October 24, 2017. http://www.processhistory.org/royles-digital-hiv-aids-history/.



