# Problems and Possibilities

This section serves as your sort-of conclusion/summary. Not a summary of the historical subject, but a summary of the process of the project itself. By discussing where you hit roadblocks and where you wish you could go if you had more time, you leave future individuals something to build on.

You should talk about where you group encountered the most difficulties. What was the hardest about scraping, or visualizing, or locating historiography? Did you have problems communicating or sharing files on GitHub?

The hardest thing for me while working on my project was getting Orange3 to analyze Clinton's emails on my computer. I had to download Orange on two computers before I was able to find one that would run Orange and let it analyze the data. After I downloaded Orange, I had to reduce the size of the CSV file from seventeen thousand to around three thousand emails because my computer was not powerful enough to run Orange on  such a large file.  Since the emails were not selected at random - the first three thousand in the CSV file were chosen - the data is not representative, which limits the ability of myself and others to use it to draw conclusions about the entire set of 30,000 emails in the archive. Thankfully, these were the only problems I encountered when trying to use Orange3 and when analyzing the CSV.

However, I also experienced  problems trying to locate sources for my historiography and digital scholarship. Hierarchical clustering is a significant part of my project, but because the digital humanities is so new, I was unable to find articles detailing its use in text analysis; I have no doubt someone has written about their use of it, but at this point in time, I could not find articles about it. Prof. David J. Thomas informed me I needed to narrow my search, suggested I look at Debates in the Digital Humanities for sources, and sent me sources addressing text analysis I used to construct my historiography and digital scholarship (Thomas, 2018. ). Without Prof. Thomas' help, I probably would not have been able to complete those sections of the project. 

In contrast to those problems though, I consider one of the project's strengths to be what it can teach scholars and the public about the events during Clinton's tenure as Secretary of State. Orange3's hierarchical clustering allowed me to see how important Republicans considered Bengazhi and how annoyed Clinton's supporters were the issue would not go away. The fact a Romney advisor called the brutal murder of four people a "gift to the campaign" is both appalling and at the same time not surprising given how easily it could be used to attack a sitting president [(WikiLeaks, 2018)](https://wikileaks.org/clinton-emails/). At the same time, one of Clinton's supporters asking why Bengazhi could not be consigned to the "same sad and sealed file of Americans killed abroad on dangerous duty" is somewhat understanable given the political and legal issu it became while showing a lack of appreciation for the lives lost [(WikiLeaks, 2018)](https://wikileaks.org/clinton-emails/). I never would have discovered those comments if I had not used Orange, and I am surprised how well it grouped emails together, and recommend scholars interested in conducting text analysis consider the program. 

For those considering further analysis of Clinton's emails, I think establishing a timeline of Bengazhi and tracing how Clinton, her opponents, and her supporters' views of Bengazhi changed at it developed into a political and legal issue. A larger team with greater technical skill and more powerful computers could lay the foundation for the project. Scholars and the public would benefit from learning about Bengazhi and the way leaders think about and address issues, which would scholars and the public the ability to make more informed decisions - whether interpreting leaders actions or choosing who the leaders will be - in the future. 


Moving on from problems, let's the reader on a positive note. What worked best, where did you think the strength of the project was? What were the most useful historical insights? What were the most useful tools?

Finally, think of future attempts to continue this line of research, whether by yourself or others. Where do you want to go with it. What areas do you think could be expanded easily? You can discuss what you wish you could have done but could not due to lack of time/skill/et.c. But, much more than that, what would you suggest would be the most useful thing(s) you think could actually be accomplished in the space of another semester?
